---
layout: post
title: Database Management System
---

*Databases* (DB) : Organized collection of data. This collection must have a regular structure,
the data is meant to capture a subset of the "real" world; the collections
are connected to each other and deal with a same subject. The data are
organized in a way that facilitates their manipulation (access, updates).

*Database Management System* (DBMS) : Dedicated software to manage databases. Organizes data storage, handles
access to data: queries, updates...

[DBMS Ranking](https://db-engines.com/en/ranking_trend)

What DBMS offers :
1. Persistent storage of data in files: 
2. Performance for queries index, query optimization...
3. Multi-user (concurrent access) transactions, locks, MVCC. . .
4. Security (access control) access rights. . .
5. Easy to use (queries, maintenance, evolution)
6. Reliability as a system (recovery after failure. . . ) logs, backups. . .
7. Data integrity (consistency)

Alternative NoSQL solutions (or plain files) may be a better choice when:
- you have too much data: > 1TB
- you need very low latency
- tiny IOT devices with limited memory
- the relational model does not fit your data (graph, time series) and queries
- your software stack integrates better with other data storage technology

*Business intelligence* (BI): set of techniques and tools that enable a
company to transform business data into into meaningful and useful
information for decision making

*DataWarehouse* (DW): repository that stores the data and infrastructure to
support analysis.

*Data relational model* : data represented by tables
*SQL* : declarative language to query & update data in relational model
*Schema* : describes data organization, the format of each column
vs *Instance*: the actual data in DB that must be organized according to the schema

3 abstraction levels in a DMBS : external (access), logical (schema), physical (storage)

DB Lifecycle : modelization and specifications / schema design, initialization / manipulations, queries, updates / maintenance (optimizations, patches, evolutions)

### Relational DBMS $\to$ Distributed DBMS

*Why* ? : parallelism, scalability, accesibility & fault-tolerance, optimization for different hardware, distribute geographically...
*How* ? : sharding ($\sim$ horizontal partitioning), but also replication

*Parallelism* : between CPUs, in the CPUs, in the queries $\to$ Large-Scale data distributed, shared memory

*Replication* : reliability, read performance by synchronization, versioning, consensus

*Challenges when distributing* : good data partition/replication, coherence (trade-off between performance and integrity when dealing with reads and writes), distributing computation tasks, fault tolerance, transaction control, data privacy

3 guarantees (CAP)
- Consistency: Every read request to the system receives data corresponding to the most recent read
- Availability: The system must answer any query to the system, even if the answer is wrong or outdated.
- Partition tolerance: The system must answer queries even under arbitrary failures of distributed nodes or of messages between nodes.
$\to$ *CAP Theorem* : A system cannot have all 3. When data is partitioned, we cannot guarantee both availability and consistency.
examples : ACID mode $\to$ consistency / BASE model $\to$ availability

#### NoSQL

Data model is not fixed but *autonomous* (denormalization, no joins). NoSQL is focused on data exchange & distribution

