---
layout: post
title: Machine learning fairness in medical problems
---

### Background

Understanding the causal connections between variables is a key objective across various fields, including social, behavioral, natural, and physical sciences. In medical studies, comprehending the link between genetic or environmental factors and the onset or severity of a disease is crucial in developing prevention, diagnosis, and treatment strategies. The most recent fairness principles acknowledge the significance of causality, recognizing that integrating causality is essential in addressing fairness issues.

Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are a well-established method of establishing causal relationships. RCTs involve assigning subjects randomly to either a test or control group and controlling the potential cause and effect factors in a controlled environment. RCTs are widely considered the best way to establish causal relationships since they minimize the risks of bias and confounding.

Confounding can arise when a third factor causes both the supposed exposure and outcome. In cases where this third factor is unknown, false assumptions about causal relationships can be made, or a weak causal relationship may be overestimated.

However, when RCTs are not feasible, causal relationships must be inferred using available observational data through causal discovery algorithms. However, reconstructing a causal graph from empirical observational data can be challenging as disentangling the true causal relationships from unknown confounding factors, mediators, and sample bias can be difficult.

### Goal

The objective of this challenge is to determine the causal direction between two variables, A and B. There are four possible scenarios: 
- A causes B
- B causes A
- A and B are both consequences of a common cause C
- A and B are independent.

For sake of simplicity, the last two scenarios are merged. Participants must provide a confidence score between negative and positive infinity. A positive score indicates that A causes B, while a negative score indicates that B causes A. The confidence score represents the level of confidence in the answer, with higher scores indicating stronger confidence. If the score is close to zero, it implies that A and B are independent or that A and B are both consequences of a common cause.
